[Music]
you
hello friends welcome back to the
section on reasoning judgment when
decision-making no this particular
section on reasoning and gentleman and
the one which is going to follow after
this decision making will be one of the
last sections that we'll be building in
this course on cognitive psychology now
in the last lecture on problem solving I
explained to you how reasoning this is
in making judgment and problem-solving
are called higher order cognitive
functions
what is the reason why they're called
higher order cognitive functions one
reason is because these processes help
us in making choices in making decisions
or in actually evaluating those mental
representations or those information
which has been stored by the primary
cognitive processes so basic primary
quality processes like attention
perception learning thinking memory
language all these cognitive processes
actually taking information raw
information from the environment and
does something onto it and store it into
memory or store it into some kind of a
store as a mental representation now
processes like problem-solving reasoning
this isn't making and thinking actually
use this information which has been
stoned to make meaningful out of outputs
out of the information which has been
stored and so these meaningful outputs
are then turned into a behavior because
of these meaningful outputs a behavior
is generated so basically the idea that
we saw in the first car itself the idea
how of cognitive thinking or cognitive
psychology really works is basically to
take an information from the environment
to use some kind of cognitive operators
onto it and arrive at a particular
conclusion arrive at a particular
decision and from this decision deciding
the way
now si psychologists believe that
there's something called stimulus there
is something called response and there
is one-to-one matching on stimulus and
response and nothing exists between the
stimulus and the response the
cognitivists believe that there is
something called the organism or the O
which they call in their paradigm this
organism has a mind which basically is
involved into producing the output or
making decisions based on incoming
information which then decides the
response
so basically stimulus response a
response to a particular stimulus is not
Association which is formed through
trial-and-error it is a well thought
process and so this well thinking or the
idea of how well thought process really
works is the culmination of that thing
is reasoning judgment and
decision-making so what is basically
reasoning judgment and this is in making
so we'll take this in making into the
next section in this section we'll just
discuss about reasoning and judgment so
what is basically reasoning and what is
judgment now if I say that barking dogs
seldom bite and then I say that Tony is
a dog and if I conclude from this that
Tony is going to buy is not going to buy
it because barking dogs seldom bite is
what the premises this is what reasoning
is all about so we think is about making
inferences from some information which
is given to you or making conclusions
out of or concluding from some
inferences judgment is a process which
is happens after reasoning and in which
we either we make some cave use some
kind of a top-down model to judge
whether the conclusion that we arrived
at is worthy of choosing or not and then
the third process of decision-making
comes along which basically goes out and
says that among the possible outcomes
which are available to us through
judgment
judgment basically what it is what it
does is judgment actually gives us a
number of outcomes from a number of
experiments or a number of information
that has been gathered so any
information which has been processed to
the basic cognitive processes it leads
to some kind of conclusions and so this
conclusion accumulating this conclusion
or deciding which conclusions are of use
or not is judgment this isn't making is
the is a process where we look at these
number of conclusions and make the
choice final choice of a judgment to go
with or waive judgment not to go so as I
said we look into reasoning and decision
design meant in this chapter and or in
this lecture and in the forthcoming
lecture or upcoming lecture we'll
venture into decision making now most
books will talk about reasoning judgment
this is making a single chapter but I
have done I what I've done is I've split
it into two parts so let's then venture
into the idea of reasoning and judgment
and basically understand what is
reasoning and what is judgment so the
process of complex thinking as I said
the process the higher order cognitive
processes it involves three processes of
reasoning judgment and this is an making
so here goes the definition
reasoning involves evaluation of a
conclusion based on solely given
information given the fact that certain
kind of information is given to you
given the given the fact that the
primary basic cognitive processes
provide you with some kind of mental
representations which which represent
certain kind of information making an
evaluation of conclusion or drawing some
conclusion from it and evaluating that
conclusion whether it is valid or not
whether it is true or not is what is
reasoning so reasoning is a process
where we go ahead and do the evaluation
of the conclusion in terms of its
validity and in terms of its true
validity for statement is whether the
statement follows from whatever premises
have been given no premises and
statements which are given before a
conclusion so generally in how reasoning
is looked at is there are a couple of
premises given to
to start with and then these premises
are known to be are are tested to be
valid or not and the job of a reasoner
is to look at these premises and then
basically go ahead and conclude whether
the conclusion which follows after the
premise is either valid or not and I
also look at the truth conditions
whether it's true or not so that that's
the job of a reason and so that's what
reasoning is all about it's about
evaluation of a conclusion and how this
evaluation is done is based on solely on
the fact that certain given information
is given a is provided to and these
given informations are what I call the
premises so we never actually go ahead
and judge the truth of the premises so
given the fact that given information is
given to you certain information is
provided to you
we never go ahead and judge the truth
valid of these statements or these
information and these information the
given information is called the premises
we only go ahead and test whether the
conclusions is logical in sense whether
whether the conclusion which follows
after a premise is logical in a
particular sense or not and this logical
being logical is what is called validity
so validity is basically if the
conclusion logically follows from the
two premises or the two premises leads
to a logical conclusion which we are
seeing as a controller so I will
elaborate that as we move into the
lecture the second part of this chapter
will be look into something called
judgment so what is judgment its
reasoning is applied to a given
information to arrive at a conclusion
and so here what we do is whatever
reasoning we use from the reasoning
whatever evaluation we do those
reasonings
are then applied to come up at certain
conclusions and that is what is judgment
so given the fact that certain
information is there and from that
certain information we arrive at a
conclusion or number of conclusions this
process is called judgment so using the
reasoning to arrive at conclusions is
basically called judgment and then what
is decision-making is the evaluation of
a given information is done to arrive at
judgment and based on the judgment our
choice among several possibilities is
done this is what is this isn't making
so reasoning leads you to validate or
basically arrive at a conclusion
judgment goes ahead and look at this and
use this reasoning to arrive at to give
information about conclusions or to
arrive at different conclusions and
these conclusions are then provided to
the decision-making operator in the
brain or decision-making current a
process in the brain which then looks at
the number of conclusions which are
there and based on the need of the are
based on the kind of requirement that
that is available at that point of time
chooses the most optimal decision so
there are several choices there are
several conclusions given to us they say
making is a process of making a choice
and this choice is done in based on
terms of cost-benefit analysis there's
ever loved ways of looking into it when
we run into the process of decision
making he'll explain it to you there so
basically the same aching is making the
choice right so these are the three
process which is there let's then go
ahead and describe these processes one
by one so the first thing that we should
be looking forward is how does this
whole process of reasoning judgment and
decision-making really go about and
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky someone
of some of the famous researchers in
this area they basically say that people
should be focusing on errors and because
while they should be focusing on errors
because the focus of an error will
provide you in into the fact of how your
reasoning how is your reasoning going on
and how is your judgment and decision
process going on so basically if you
want to study reasoning and judgment
they should be not looking at judgments
which are correct we should be looking
at errors in judgment and
decision-making because these errors in
judgment judgments and decision making
will be giving you more information as
to what should be done or what is wrong
with a particular judgment process or
what is the most optimal way of
reasoning and judgment so the emphasis
in research and reasoning and judgment
decision-making has been on mistakes
that people made and then can men Nobel
prize-winner
makes in 2004 2002 or four I are not
very sure about that but he says he
believes that errors provide us with
input in furtiveness informativeness now
what does it really mean when we look at
when how a person does job correctly it
doesn't give you much of an answer
because he does the job correctly and so
that's it what should be what should one
be focusing on is how an error is done
or what should we one be focusing on is
what kind of error exists in completing
a job because this focus on error will
tell you what not to do and so in any
job or in any kind of decision system it
is better to find out what not to do
then to find out what to do because what
to do is what is required but then for
our for arriving at what to do we have
to look at the hindrances and then look
at the ways of getting around with
hindrances and so that's what Daniel
Kahneman says he says that focusing on
errors give us more information now the
conditions under which are thinking
fails us really important aspects of
cognitive processing and inform us how
the process of reasoning judgment in
decision-making process really works so
basically that's what he conclude he
says that by looking at errors in either
judgment reasoning reasoning and
decision-making we actually come to know
a lot about what is the way to
particular reasoning or what is the
process of a particular reasoning or a
particular decision and so that provides
us with what not to do or how to process
because these errors will also tell us
how the system looks like now think
about a think about a field in which a
lot of people are playing football now
there is one way to one of them uses a
correct method of a goal and goes ahead
and scores a goal now if you only
concentrate on that of how he scored the
goals or how is code a particular goal
will only be knowing that how a world is
code but if we look at all the errors
that he did while scoring the goal will
come to know what not to do in a match
and how to win matches because this kind
of problems are this kind of errors into
a wire judgment
decision-making doesn't succeed we will
tell you more about the system of what
are the hindrances which are out there
because if you if you never face a
hindrance you will only know one part to
a goal but facing hindrances facing
difficulty and it happens with lies also
if you face difficulties in life these
difficulties actually tell you what life
is all about so when I tend to take a
tell you that I have a lot of life
experience what it really means that I
have seen a lot of negatives in life and
I have not always been successful and
being unsuccessful is a good thing
because the more you being successful
the more you learn because doing the
correct thing doesn't give you
opportunity to learn learning doesn't
happen because then then you always
reach the goal and so there is no
learning in it and so that's what our
Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman talks
about so how exactly do we know that a
given chain of reasoning judgment in
decision making is in error what is the
process in which which tells you well
whether a particular process of
reasoning judgment and decision making
is erroneous now there are several
approaches to it but what can men and
Tversky actually proposes is there had
two ways of particular thinking one
approach is called the normative
approach and which describes how we out
to think in a given situation so these
are the rules right so normative
approach are the norms which are set in
by society it says that this is what we
tend to do so normative approaches are
those approaches which are what people
should be actually doing while the
second approach is called the
descriptive approach describes how we
actually think and descriptive
approaches is what people actually do so
normative approach and different and
descriptive approach the difference
between them a is normative approach our
rules are ideal conditions of what
should be done in a particular situation
and descriptive approach is actually the
thing or actually the process which is
applied to reach at a conclusion because
nobody is ideal or no system is ideal
and so of descriptive approaches are the
optimal solutions which lead you to the
final result whereas descriptive
approach is the
the normative approach is the ideal
process or the ideal condition of doing
a particular task now let's look at a
problem so given the fact that there is
a family and so this family has had the
chance of child rearing and so for the
past four or five pregnancies
a woman has let's say six boys right
then comes a boy along which is the same
then comes a seventh child now what do
you think if I ask you the question what
do you think so the condition is that I
have a family
or I have a woman who has produced
offsprings six boys in number and then
she is also ready if she is now ready
for a seventh offspring so what is the
chances or what is it that the
probability that or rather or what do
you think will be the seventh child and
so what happens is the normative
approach say is that whether it is a
girl or a boy is independent of the the
the probability of what happened before
and so in in terms of normative approach
each case or each boy or girl being born
it has a probability of 50% half the
chance of being born and so the seventh
in fact the seventh child in the case of
the seventh child also the probability
of a girl or a boy is fifty-fifty
whereas the descriptive approach will
say that since seven six boys have
already been born
the chances of is there something
novelty would happen and so it there are
higher chances of a girl now the thing
is this higher chances of a girl it
doesn't it's not supported by the theory
of probability because each each event
of childbearing is independent of each
other and there is no relation to it and
so the seven should also be independent
to each other but people miss does this
kind of a fact and they say that or they
conclude that where the the seventh
child will be more of a girl simply
because of the reason that six children
which have been one before where boys
and so this is the difference between
what a normative approach and
descriptive approaches normative
approach is what norms are and so norms
of probability say that the chance
girl or boy is still 50% in the seventh
child but descriptive approaches how
people actually think and so people miss
culture this so they say that or they
believe that the chance of a girl
increases because six boys have already
been born in a row and so this is the
difference of what a normative and
descriptive approaches further to it
there is a concept of bounded
rationality and so what does it say so
Barron 19 1999 believes that rationality
is not necessarily the same thing as
accuracy and that irrationality is not
the same thing as error when I see a
judgement or when I say a particular
reasoning is rational what do I mean by
that what is rationality how do we
describe rationality and so what Baron
says is being rational is not same as
being accurate so if you do a job nicely
if a do do a job correctly it may not
always be rational you may not always be
rational in doing it similarly if you
create errors or if you get into errors
by doing a particular job if the way of
thinking that you employed may not be
irrational in nature and so this
rationality and irrationality is
basically independent of the accuracy of
performing a job now rationality
involves choosing the method that help
us attain our goals so basically then
rationality says that use those methods
whether it on the on the effectiveness
of it
so those methods produce results and
using those methods to attain goals is
what rationality is rationality it
doesn't talk about whether accuracy is
affected by it or not and so that's that
is what is the difference between it so
we can reason well but still have a
decision which will work which may not
work out and so given the fact that we
use best of a reasoning and still the
conclusion may not work in our favor or
the the job output or the situation
output may not work in our favor and
sometimes the reason badly and still the
conclusion is in our favor and so there
is no way to actually to suggest what is
rational and
this is related to the accuracy or doing
a particular job now the simple notion
that there are limits to our power of
reason is what is called banded
rationality and so bonded rationality
basically says that human beings since
they are bounded by this structure they
are not calculators or they are not
people or there are not physical
calculators or calculators in terms of
physical sciences they are not computing
machines and so they have limits in
terms of thinking and reasoning and so
they make errors and that is what the
whole idea of bounded rationality it
says that rationality the idea of
rationality of what is rational and what
is rational depends a lot about the
thinking process and what who is making
the decision in terms of computer a
decision a particular decision may be
rational or not but in terms of humans
that same decision when the computer has
given may not be rational right and so
this kind of rationality is of how we
define rationality is what is called
bounded rationality concept that people
are bound by limitations on through the
power of reasoning so basically then how
do people reason and for answering that
question it was proposed that human
beings actually go ahead and use two
modes of reasoning the first mode is
called the heuristic mode which is
called the system one mode and in this
the process used for thinking operate
quickly and without much deliberation so
the first way is quick reasoning process
where a huge T is used as mental
shortcut is used so you just remember
from problem-solving chapter Urist is
basically a thumb rule a rule of thumb a
shortcut of an algorithm so that is what
a erases and so in heuristic mode people
use some kind of a shortcut don't think
too much and reason automatically in a
position to that there is an analog
analytical mode of thinking which is
called system to thinking and where the
process are relatively slow deliberate
in control so there is one kind of
thinking there is one kind of judgment
and reasoning process which is automatic
in nature which is called system one and
there is another kind of thinking for
reasoning
decision-making process which is more
deliberate and so depending on what how
much value the disease and in reasons
have to you you either use the
deliberate mode or the analytical board
the heuristic mode or the analytical
goal the ethical mode is more
cognitively demanding than the heuristic
one and that is what since you have to
do a number of alterations a number of
calculations so analytical mode are more
demanding more engaging and and so they
require a lot of working memory too so
that was what about thinking was that is
a brief description of what thinking is
let's not jump into what is reasoning so
what does it reasoning really mean there
are two types of reasoning as I said
reasoning is basically looking at
conclusions or drawing conclusions from
given pieces of information that is what
reasoning is so basically then two type
of reasoning exist one is called
the deductive reasoning the other is
called the inductive reasoning and we'll
start with our section or will will be
sticking to deductive reasoning in this
particular lecture so what is deductive
reasoning deductive reasoning is very
simple it involves determining if a
specific conclusion is valid based on
general principle or assertions or
premises
so basically there are certain premises
which have been given now when I say
valid a valid statement may not be true
right and so the thing that I was
explaining at the beginning of the
section in reasoning in deductive
reasoning it might happen that the
premises that the values that have been
given to you that the previous knowledge
that has been given to you they may be
valid bit but may not be true and so in
deductive reasoning we do not think
about the truth values of a statement
truth values is how are whether a
statement is true or not so what we tend
to do is we look at a number of
conditions and we look at a number of
premises which have been given to you
previous knowledge is given to you and
from these previous knowledge we try to
arrive at a conclusion and that is what
deductive reasoning is all about so
deductive reasoning problems involved a
large degree of constraint and the
conclusion is easily assessed using
algorithmic approach so in deductive
reasoning what we do is we are bound
a lot of rules a lot of constraints are
there and then we use the algorithmic
approach to arrive better at a result
and since you use the algorithmic
approach always a result is out there so
basically what deductive reasoning tend
to do is look at previous knowledge as
focus on previous knowledge is based on
that arrive at a conclusion and how do I
arrive at a conclusion by using an
algorithmic approach and using certain
kind of Endurance's or certain rules
which are out there now there are two
primary types of deductive reasoning
which are there and events in 2002 use
two classification systems or deductive
reasoning the first is called the
syllogistic reasoning so what is
syllogistic reasoning look at the
statements which I mean given to you so
it said there's all students are bright
and then all bright people complete
assignments on work therefore these are
the premises so I have three mice one
and then I have premised two and then I
have premised the conclusion see here so
P wise one I'll say this is valid right
and then I'll say this is valid and then
what I have to do is reason whether the
conclusion that I draw from these two
valid conclusions for those two valid
premises premised two and premise one
whether this conclusion which I draw
from it is valid or not now let me
explain to you all students are bright
now if I look at the truth condition if
I know the truth value of this it may
not be true so we call our stress or not
right and we all know that right so the
fact is that in deductive reasoning we
never look at the truth conditions we
always look at the validity and so all
students are bright is a valid statement
right similarly all right people
complete assignment on work may not be
true but then it is valid and since both
the conditions are valid we try to
engage in this kind of a conclusion
which says that all students complete
assignment on work how does it conclude
and what we want to check is whether
this conclusion comes from these two
statements and so in this case it does
right and so that is what is did a
syllogistic reasoning so then let's
break this up and understand what a
syllogistic reasoning so syllogism
generally consists of two premises and a
conclusion
and I said mostly logistic reason the
examples will have two premises to start
with premise 1 and 2 and these premises
are then followed by a certain
conclusion the promisor conclusions may
begin with the universal quantifier all
or particular quantifier son as you saw
in these statements it says all students
all students all students or it could
also say some students have right all
students all right so basically most of
these reasoning examples they start up
with these kind of quantifiers which are
either summer or also the terms within a
syllogism may be stated positively which
is all ARB or negatively all AR not be
so the terms or the syllogism the
statement itself could be both negative
and positive if it is positive it will
be all A's or B's if it is negative it
will be always or not B's it could also
be some a as a czar B's some ways are
not B's and so on and so forth so
depending on the quantifier and
depending on the Silla how the
conditional syllogism is or the
environmental syllogism is a
particularly large statement will be
stated in a positive or a negative
reference frame so syllogisms are either
valid or not that is it the conclusions
either does or does not hold given the
premise and that is what we said that I
that I said so more syllogisms are
tested on their validity whether the
conclusions followed from the statements
we do not test the truth conditions from
reading repeating again we do not test
the truth condition but this is an error
most people try to test this in a truth
condition and so there are errors in
making this kind of reasoning this kind
of syllogistic reasoning deductive
reasoning which are all syllogistic
reasoning and that is one reason for
error which may appear on which may
appear to us and so that is that error
has happened because we were testing the
truth condition so varied arguments then
imply that the conclusion does not
followed from
thus follow from the premises and so any
valid conclusion basically says that
these conclusions are following from the
premises
however it says that nothing about
whether the premises are true or not and
that's what we have been discussing with
that truth it may not be a part of it
that the truth value of an argument
depends on what the valid it is the
argument form and the truth of the
premises right so a condition a
particular syllogistic reasoning may be
valid but may not be true for example
look at this all professors are
comedians all comedians are funny so I
have premised one here and then I have
to be my Stu here so pretty much one
says that all professors are comedians
and similarly all comedians are funny is
premised number two and therefore I make
the conclusion we generate sort of fate
and so what is the conclusion that all
prophecies are funny now looking at it
this is a valid reasoning but in terms
of truth conditions most professors are
not comedians neither the fact that
comedians are all comedians are funny
and so in terms of truth conditions it
will fail but in terms of validity this
statement will pass similarly all our is
our B's all C's are B's therefore all
agencies similarly that kind of a
problem may exist for this kind of a
reasoning for this kind of reasoning no
arranges our apple no lemons or oranges
therefore no apples and lemons is so
what what do you think is this whether
it is valid or not whether this
conclusion is drawn from it or from the
premise so I have prima 1 and I have
premised 2 so what you need to tell me
is whether this conclusion is can be
drawn from the particular premises or
not so are these conclusions value valid
based on the respective premises the if
not then if you are not able to answer
this correctly then it there are certain
errors which are making you draw
internet control jewels and so what are
the reasons or what are those factors
which are making you draw incorrect
conclusions one of the first first
factors is called atmospheric effects so
what are the atmospheric effects
atmospheric effects says that the
quantifier used in the premise combine
to form
atmosphere which in which the valid is
rather the conclusion is racist now as
we looked into it a premise has a
quantifier it starts with a quantifier
the quantifier could be all or some and
so given the fact and we also looked at
the environment
right so whether a quantifier is
positively stated or negatively stated
and so what it says here is that certain
quantifiers may have certain kind of
frosty Winston's or negative instance
and this positive instances or this
positive effect of the quantifiers leads
to people over judging or misjudging the
conclusion to be falling in line with
the environment of the premise let's say
for demise is positively stated premise
two is positively stated so people are
more likely to validate those
conclusions which are positively stated
then to validate those statements which
are negatively stated and so this is the
one one of the reasons for the kind of
error that can happen in syllogistic
reasoning a positive universal
atmosphere is produced by a positive
instance and this produces in an
erroneous tendency to claim that
universals Universal and positive
conclusions are valid that is what we
looked at so basically if two premises
are stated in a positive way and that
leads us to follow that the chances are
very high that people will go ahead and
validate a conclusion which is framed in
a positive instance in a positive
atmosphere than in a negative atmosphere
and so this negative atmospheres or this
kind of errors can exist the second kind
of error which can exist in terms of
reasoning in syllogistic reasoning is
that believe biased so what is the
believed bias our believes about truth
interfere with the ability to assess the
argument for validity and that's not
what I have been telling you so our
belief system tells us that professors
are not comedians and so they're itself
you make an error what we need to do in
syllogistic reasoning is look at
validity and not the truth conditions
but most people get stuck with the truth
condition of it and then decide that
professors are not funny and so this
statement cannot be valid and so this
cannot be true and if it is not true the
conclusions can never be true and so
that is the problem which is out there
and so this kind of error is called the
believed bias for example look at these
statements so all intelligence beings
are Simpson fans all dolphins are
intelligent beings therefore so this is
premise one positively stated the
is premised to positively stated and
this is my conclusion which is again
positively stated and but the moment you
give this conclusion to people they'll
say that this is not valid
why for statement one they look at the
validity for statement two they look at
the validity but as soon as they look at
this dolphins are intelligent beings it
is valid and it is true too but when
they conclude dolphins are Simpson fans
they use their knowledge of truth
condition they believe that dolphins
don't get a chance to look at citizens
and so there is no way our dog feeling
is actually going to be a Simpson fan
and so that leads them to say that this
is invalid whereas this is a perfectly
valid statement because this statement
here somehow interfere with people's
belief systems
now the tendency to allow believes to
interfere with the evaluation of
conclusion in syllogistic the arguments
has been termed as belief bias so this
kind of problem that arise is called the
believed bias for example look at these
statements all smart people are
reasonable now premise one positively
stated all Democrats are smart people
positively stated this is the conclusion
and so we're looking at statement one
and two we look at the validity of the
statement but when looking at all
Democrats is nibble and so given the
fact that you are not a Democrat you
will never believe it and so you the
interfere your belief interferes with
the idea or shakes or basically goes
head and monitors this statement this
conclusion in terms of what you believe
in what you don't and based on that it
it evaluates this statement not in terms
of validity but it gains the terms are
truth and so it says it is not true
which is wrong this is the first kind of
reasoning out there the second kind of
deductive reasoning which is available
to us or which has been shown by events
or in 2002 is something called
conditional reasoning so what is
conditional reasoning in the second form
of deductive reasoning called
conditional reasoning it's called the if
and then reasoning this kind of
reasoning is called if and then
reasoning and involves evaluating
whether a particular conclusion is
Aled given a certain condition or
premises hold basically it you have a
statement to start with which has an
antecedent and which has a consequent
and following that as another premise so
you have a scenario where you have even
then statement and again it is about
validity and truth conditions and from
there you are given a premise and you
have to look at the pre mines
look at the statement which has been
given to you which is in the if-then
format if antecedent and consequent and
then you have to conclude whether the
premise which follows after the incident
statement whether it leads to the right
conclusion or a valid conclusion for
example let's look at this if someone
likes we need the puh they are sensitive
person so this part of the statement is
called the antecedent and this part is
called the consequent antecedent because
it starts before consequent is this so
this is someone lies we need the Pugh is
the antecedent it is the first statement
right and then because of that they are
sensitive person is the consequence so
someone likes Winnie the Pooh makes them
a sensitive person this is what the
statement is so if this then this right
and then there is a second statement
there is a second premise which says
that Mary lies Winnie the Pooh now given
the fact that this is premised one this
is premised to whether this conclusion
is valid or not
so therefore Mary is a sensitive person
what do you think and so what you would
realize is that this is true this kind
of conclusion is true because someone
lining within the Pooh they are
sensitive person and Mary likes Winnie
the Pooh so she has to be sensitive
because most people who like Winnie the
Pooh a sensitive person and so this kind
of reasoning is called conditional
reasoning now another version of the
reasoning problem is if someone likes
winning the Pooh they are sensitive
person mary is a sensitive person now in
the first case I have affirmed the
antecedent which means that I have
validated or I have my premise has
validated the antecedent in the second
statement I am validating the consequent
I am validating the reason then part of
the statement the consequent part of the
statement and then it follows therefore
Mary likes Winnie the Pooh what do you
think whether this conclusion is drawn
from or is a correct conclusion and so
what you will come to know is that this
is not the correct conclusion so this is
my premise 1 this is my premise 2 this
is not valid so not valid right
conditional reasoning conclusions can be
evaluated
quite easily even applies a set of
logical rules so how do we go ahead and
then know which statements is correct
and which statements and not how to go
ahead and and look at particular
conditional statement or find out which
conditional statements are valid or not
so most conditional statements so if
let's take this conditional statement if
someone likes Winnie the Pooh which is
the antecedent
then they are a sensitive person which
is the consequent for scenarios can
develop out of it right the from this
four scenarios from any other this is
the first statement which is there and
then any premised that I draw from it a
second premise can go any of the way
what do I mean by this I can have the
premise and stated in two different my
second premise what does Mary do or if
somebody likes Winnie the Pooh and so he
should be a sensitive person is the
statement and then Mary is either
sensitive person or like Winnie the Pooh
both of these conclusions most of these
can can be put into four scenarios the
first is affirming the antecedent
affirming the consequent and I can go
denying the end citizen and denying the
consequent so for truth basically this
is in terms of technology in terms of a
truth table so since this is not a logic
class or not bringing in that logic but
this is these are the four scenarios or
four conclusions which can be drawn from
it so given the fact that if I have a
statement like this this statement leads
to four different scenarios out of that
Mary likes Winnie the Pooh therefore
Mary is sensitive person right and so
this is correct this is valid why it is
true and in terms of logic though this
is called the modus ponens oh and what
is this basically affirming the incident
antecedent is always giving valid
statement so if I if I have a if-then
reasoning and in that if-then
my promis-- validates the antecedent or
affirms the antecedent it will always be
true let's look at that statement in
which my pre mice are forms the
consequent Mary is a sensitive person
therefore Mary likes Winnie the Pooh and
so this control is not valid because all
sensitive persons do not like even in
the Pooh it is the other way around if
somebody likes Winnie the Pooh only then
they are sensitive persons but then
there will be hundreds of people who are
sensitive and may not like when in the
Pooh and that is why it is not valid and
so a firming the consequent is never
valid and so these are mental shortcuts
that we need to use or that we need to
basically apply to these kinds of
reasoning to come up with certain
conclusions the third is denying the
antecedent Mary does not like Winnie the
Pooh therefore Mary is not a sensitive
person again this is not valid because
denying the antecedent doesn't really
mean so if somebody doesn't like we need
the Pooh it necessary doesn't mean that
they are not sensitive because all
sensitive people don't like Winnie the
Pooh it is the other way around
most people who like Winnie the Pooh are
sensitive but it doesn't say anything
about whether how sensitive people
believe or the fact that whether all
sensitive people like Winnie the Pooh so
that kind of statement conclusions
cannot be drawn and so denying the
consequent is always a not valid thing
but then denying the consequent always
leads to a valid conclusion and so if
Mary is not a sensitive person and of
course she is
or he this person Mary is not going to
like Winnie the Pooh because people who
like the way the Pooh are always
sensitive and so somebody doesn't like
Winnie the Pooh so they are not too
sensitive and so this is called the
modal Stern else and therefore Mary
doesn't like me the Pooh
so two conditions affirming the
antecedent or denying the consequent in
our if-then reasoning in a conditional
reasoning will always lead to those
conclusions two valid conclusions
anything other than that will lead to
invalid conclusions in conditional
reasoning so people run into a lot of
problem of difficulty when judging the
validity of conclusions derived from
if-then statements now one tendency that
people run into is
by conditional which basically means
that if P then Q is wrongly interpreted
by people as if Q then P so if we need
likes somebody likes Winnie the Pooh
there are sensitive person if P then Q
people also judge a backward
conditioning or a backward linkage to it
which basically means that all sensitive
persons like me the Pooh where has this
that my statement does not at all say
that people who are sensitive like
Winnie the Pooh it's a forward direction
of statement it says that if P then Q it
never says that if Q then P and so when
people would tend to do make errors is
because they go ahead and judge it in a
backward sense saying that if Q then P
not to test how people to about or get
caught into this kind of structure from
Wasson design a selection task and so
what I did was the classic question of
the task requires the reasoner to decide
which of the four cards need to be
turned over in order to determine the
following evening statement and so what
is the statement if a card has a vowel
on one side so if then statement this is
the antecedent and this is the
consequent if a card has a vowel on one
side then it must have a even number on
the opposite side so this is the
statement I need to test if a card has a
vowel on one side then it must have an
even number on the opposite side and so
these are the four cards which are there
one two three four now my question to
you is which of these statements which
of these cards two cars do I need to
flip over and check for finding out
whether this treatment holds up not and
the statement is if a car has a word on
one side then it must have a even number
on the opposite side if I want to check
this rule what should I do
what should people do or what what will
you do to test this so the error here
appears is that most people tend to flip
the a card and the two card and this is
where the problem is remember what I
said you have to either affirm the
antecedent or denying the consequent and
so if you want to come
with this if you want to come up with
this solution you have to turn card
number one which is affirming the
antecedent or card number four which is
denying the consequent the consequent is
an even number so denied that and
denying that will remove the card or
turn the card which is an odd number and
check whether it has a woven on to it or
not and so this is the right solution
but as you will find out and as you
would have done you would have turned
the even number card and the woven card
and so that is the problem if P then Q
kind of a thing so the selection
tendency or wst worsen solution test is
called revealed something called a
confirmatory bias and people generally
do this error because this is called the
confirmatory bias which refers to a
tendency to seek out or notice evidences
that that is constraint with a
particular hypothesis and so we're
testing this hypothesis we believe that
if we let let's check the bobble thing
and let's check the card with the wobble
on to it and the even number on to it
and this is what is called the
confirmatory bias and I have an evidence
that would be inconsistent so we always
look at two positives into it to
consistence in into it or to consistent
statements into it and so the consistent
way a statement is since if-then says a
wore well any human number we'll go
ahead and check the wobble and the event
number but what we should be doing is
checking the wobble and checking an odd
number denied and accepting the a
fervent affirming the antecedent and
denying the consequent so there are
several rules or models of deductive
reasoning explainations of how we reason
deductively generally fall into two
different caps one say is that there are
strict or rule-based accounts now what
what does it say it says that people
possess certain representations
equivalent of logical rules so people in
their mind they have these certain
logical rules or representations of
logical rules in their head and that
makes them think or - make them go ahead
and perform on the reasoning task or
come up with solutions on to the
reasoning task so if a conclusion is
valid we use these logical rules there
is another format or there is another
way to look into it there is another
Rule two it or another model which is
out there which says how people go ahead
and reason and that is called the mental
model view by Johnson in layer and what
does it say it says that we first form
mental model based on information that
premises and our own previous
experiences have so looking at the
information which is given in the
premise and looking at our own personal
experiences we form mental models next
we search for a mental model in which
the premises would be true but the
stated conclusion would be false so what
we do is once we make a model out of it
from the information from the premises
which is given in our past experiences
we then look at our memory for all those
models which are available to us in
which the premises is true but the
conclusion is false
now you're successful if you find a
model where the premises are true and
the conclusion is fault which is given
in front of you then we select that
model otherwise we don't need to so what
we tend to do is we use a mental model
approach we look at the information
which is given to use our past
experiences create mental model and then
go ahead and validate or non validate a
particular statement so what we did in
this class is we looked at what is
thinking what is the process of thinking
how does thinking really work and all
the details about the thinking process
the nature of thinking process and why
should we focusing on a rat for unto it
and after that we looked at a particular
kind of reasoning which is called
deductive reasoning so we looked at what
is deductive reasoning what what causes
errors in deductive reasoning and
specifically we looked at two types of
deductive reasoning which is out there
one is the syllogistic reasoning so we
look at what is a syllogistic reasoning
how does it function what are the
chances of error into it and then we
looked at something called conditional
reasoning in which we looked at how does
the conditional reasoning work and what
are the solutions to conditional
reasoning Hart is the most valid way to
come up with conclusions in conditional
reasoning and errors to it and then to
end it up we saw how or what models are
used for reasoning or what are the
different models which are available out
there which people tend to use for
reasoning to progress or for people to
reason so in the upcoming lecture we
will discuss another format of reasoning
which is out there which is called in
the
the reasoning and in addition to that
we'll look at certain judgment
procedures how does judgment really work
so given the fact that we have reasoned
how does judgment progress and bring up
valid conclusions and from then on we
look into the process of decision-making
which actually helps you choose among
the various judgments which are out
there thank you
[Music]
you